# Timing Ultrafast X-ray and Optical Pulses at LCLS
When performing time-resolved experiments a key consideration is the temporal resolution of the measurements being made. The time resolution must be high enough in order to match the relevant processes under investigation. The X-ray pulses generated by the LCLS are ultrashort, on the order of a few femtoseconds-tens of femtoseconds, even reaching attosecond ranges in certain special operational modes. In principle, this means that the LCLS can be used to investigate chemical and physical phenomena on the femtosecond timescale - the timescale of nuclear and electronic motion. Using ultrafast optical lasers to initiate reactions, fundamental light-induced processes can be probed with high spatial, temporal, and spectroscopic resolution by the X-ray pulses generated at the LCLS. The exact, theoretical, temporal resolution of these measurements will be determined by the temporal cross-correlation of the exciting ("pump") optical pulse and probing ("probe") X-ray pulse. However, measuring this cross-correlation is a non-trivial matter, as is timing the relative arrival time of the two pulses down to the femtosecond scale. The nature of the X-ray generation process at LCLS poses additional challenges to timing that do not occur, for example, in the field of ultrafast spectroscopy.

The following page will provide an introduction to how sub-picosecond timing can be performed, timing challenges introduced by self-amplified spontaneous emission (SASE) X-ray generation, and how these challenges are addressed and overcome at SLAC. This is an introduction geared at understanding the theory behind ultrafast timing at SLAC, and is meant to be read calmly, without the pressure of beamtime. A short, non-theoretical, walkthrough for running the necessary timing software is also provided [here](/during/timetool), for reference when under time-pressure.

## The Instrument Response Function and Ultrafast Timing
- Need a measurement (IRF) at least as fast as relevant process
  - Electric timing is too slow
  - Must use the pulses themselves

- Cross-correlation **is** the IRF when using optical/x-ray pulses

## Cross-correlation: Measuring Temporal Coincidence and the IRF
- Two pieces of information given by cross-correlation:
  - Time-zero : When does reaction start
  - The IRF : Temporal resolution

### Understanding the Direction of Time
- Which pulse is the probe, which is the pump?
- Include figures

## SASE and Temporal Jitter

## Correcting for Jitter on a Shot-by-Shot Basis
